### CS 441 Project

cnf49 | Winter 2026 | CS441

##### Building and Sample Programs

After cloning the repository, the compiler can be built with make.
First, run `cmake .` to put together the makefiles. Then, run `make`.
Sample programs have been included in the programs/ directory. They can be run with './comp programs/stack.prg | ./ir441 exec.'
Read individual milestone instructions for specific information on how to run programs for that version of the compiler.

##### Milestone 1

This milestone includes a parser, a conversion to IR (with tag checking for integers and pointers), and a peephole optimization. There is some code for naive SSA if partial credit is possible, but I wasn't able to get it working without errors so the functionality has been stripped from the ./comp executable.

The chosen peephole optimization prevents tag checking on 'this' since it's always a pointer. This optimization is done in the IRBuilder.h and IRBuilder.cpp in the helper functions for outputting tag checking, tag stripping, and tagging. Instead of emitting IR, if the pinhole optimization is turned on, these functions will simply pass if dealing with %this.

##### Milestone 2

This milestone contains code to generate SSA form using dominator trees and perform Value Numbering on this SSA form. A small parsing bug causing programs with an empty line at the end to crash the compiler was fixed. The -noSSA flag will generate code without SSA form. The -noVN flag will generate code with SSA but without value numbering.

For SSA, while I do not have a naive implementation to directly compare to, compiling stack.prg with SSA enabled will clearly generate fewer phi nodes than the naive implementation would have. In the "do" method in the "Stacker" class, one basic block generates only a single phi node for x, and another only generates a phi node for v. Clearly, this is less than the naive case where both blocks would have generated phi nodes for x and v.

For Value Numbering, compiling 'vn.prg' demonstrates a very small example of value numbering at work. In this exmaple, for 4+4, value numbering is able to recognize untagging each constant as the same operation, reducing two division operations into a single one. This implementation of value numbering, however, will only work for single basic blocks, and it is being handicapped by the heavy burden of constant tag checks, which chunk methods up heavily. In Milestone 3, value numbering will demonstrate a more significant performance improvement.

As a final note, the compiler generated by this version of the project is kept around as the executable 'untyped_comp' so it can be used for later comparison when typing is made concrete.

##### Milestone 3

This milestone includes the addition of typing to the language. Tag checks have been stripped, which removed the need for the %this pinhole optimization (-noOPT is no longer a value option). In addition, field lookups are no longer done by on-the-fly field table consultation. Field lookups are done at compile time, and the memory for the field is directly accessed at runtime.

Several files have been included for comparison between this benchmark and the previous one. The executable for the untyped compiler is included in artifacts/ as well as performance traces for a typed and untyped version of the complex stack program. Both stack.prg (works with the comp file generated by make) and untyped_stack.prg (works with artifacts/untyped_comp) are included in the programs directory as well as vn.prg and sample.prg, two more typed programs for testing.

It is also notable, looking through the generated IR, that value numbering is much more effective (as predicted) on the typed program, as there are many fewer branches to split up operations that might potentially be optimized away.

##### Milestone 4

This milestone introduces a GC Map that directly precedes the address of the vtable of an object. On allocation, it is filled with a 64 bit value. One bit corresponds to one field, with a 0 in a bit if that field should be ignored by the garbage collector (vtable pointer or integer value, for example) and a 1 in the bit if it is a pointer to another object. 

The programs/memhog.prg demonstrates the GC being effective. When run with exec-fixedmem, memhog crashes with an out of memory exception. When running with exec-gc, the program successfully terminates.

The code for generating this tag is in the getGCMap method of IRBuilder (located in frontend/irbuilder.cpp), where the fields of a class are iterated, inserting 1s into a bitmap for the fields of the object. This object is then inserted into memory by a store operation in the ClassRef::convertToIR method (located in frontend/ASTtoIR.cpp).

While the build instructions are the same for this milestone, the ir441 interpreter must be run with either the exec-fixedmem or the exec-gc flag. Writing the GC Map to the field before the vtable triggers an illegal write exception otherwise.